our lives depend on a world we can't see
think about your week so far have you
watched TV used GPS checked the weather
or even ate a meal these many things
that enable our daily lives rely either
directly or indirectly on satellites and
while we often take for granted the
services that satellites provide us the
satellites themselves deserve our
attention as they are leaving a lasting
mark on the space they occupy people
around the world rely on satellite
infrastructure every day for information
entertainment and to communicate
there's agricultural and environmental
monitoring internet connectivity
navigation satellites even play a role
in the operation of our financial and
energy markets but these satellites that
we rely on day in and day out have a
finite life they might run out of
propellant they could malfunction or
they may just naturally reach the end of
their mission life at this point these
satellites effectively become space junk
cluttering the orbital environment so
imagine you're driving down the highway
on a beautiful sunny day out running
errands you've got your music cranked
your windows rolled down with the cool
breeze blowing through your hair feels
nice right everything is going smoothly
until suddenly your car stutters and
stalls right in the middle of the
highway so now you have no choice but to
abandon your car where it is on the
highway maybe you are lucky enough to be
able to move it out of the way and into
a shoulder lane so that it's out of the
way of other traffic a couple of hours
ago your car was a useful machine that
you relied on in your everyday life
now it's a useless hunk of metal taking
up space in a valuable transportation
network and imagine international
roadways all cluttered with broken
down vehicles that are just getting in
the way of other traffic and imagine the
debris that would be strewn everywhere
if a collision actually happened
thousands of smaller pieces of debris
becoming new obstacles this is the
paradigm of the satellite industry
satellites that are no longer working
are often left to the orbit over many
many years
or only moved out of the way as a
temporary solution and there are no
international laws in space to enforce
us to clean up after ourselves so the
world's first satellite Sputnik 1 was
launched in 1957 and in that year there
were only a total of three launch
attempts decades later and dozens of
countries from all around the world have
launched thousands of more satellites
into orbit and the frequency of launches
is only going to increase in the future
especially if you consider things like
the possibility of 900 plus satellite
constellations being launched now we
send satellites to different orbits
depending on what they're needed for one
of the most common places we send
satellites is the low Earth orbit
possibly to image the surface of Earth
at up to about 2,000 kilometers altitude
satellites there are naturally buffeted
by Earth's atmosphere so their orbits
naturally decay and they'll eventually
burn up probably within a couple of
decades another common place we send
satellites is the geostationary orbit at
about 35,000 kilometers altitude
satellites there remain in the same
place above Earth as the Earth rotates
which enables things like communications
or television broadcasts for example
satellites and high orbits like these
could remain there for centuries and
then there's the orbit coined the
graveyard the ominous junk or disposal
orbits where some satellites are
intentionally placed at the end of their
life so that they're out of the way of
common operational orbits of the nearly
7,000 satellites launched since the late
1950s only about one in seven is
currently operational and in addition to
the satellites that are no longer
working
there's also hundreds of
thousands of marble sized debris and
millions of paint chip size debris that
are also orbiting around the earth space
debris is a major risk to space missions
but also to the satellites that we rely
on each and every day now because space
debris and junk has become increasingly
worrisome there have been some national
and international efforts to develop
technical standards to help us limit the
generation of additional debris so for
example there are recommendations for
those low-earth orbiting spacecraft to
be made to deorbit in under 25 years but
that's still a really long time
especially if a satellite hasn't been
working for years there's also mandates
for those dead geostationary spacecraft
to be moved into a graveyard orbit but
neither of these guidelines is binding
under international law and the
understanding is that they will be
implemented through national mechanisms
these guidelines are also not long-term
they're not proactive nor do they
address the debris that's already up
there they're only in place to limit the
future creation of debris space junk is
no one's responsibility now Mount
Everest is actually an interesting
comparison of a new approach to how we
interact with our environments as it's
often given the dubious honor of being
the world's highest garbage dump decades
after the first conquest of the world's
highest peak tons of rubbish left behind
by climbers has started to raise concern
and you may have read in the news that
their speculation that Nepal will crack
down on Mountaineers with stricter
enforcement of penalties and legal
obligations the goal of course is to
persuade climbers to clean up after
themselves
so maybe local not-for-profits will pay
climbers who bring down extra waste or
expeditions might organize voluntary
cleanup trips and yet still many
climbers feel that independent groups
should police themselves there's no
simple or easy answer and even
well-intentioned efforts at conservation
often run into problems but that doesn't
mean we shouldn't do everything in our
power to protect the environments that
we rely and depend on
and like Everest the remote location and
inadequate infrastructure of the orbital
environment make waste-disposal a
challenging problem but we simply cannot
reach new heights and create an even
higher garbage dump one that's out of
this world the reality of space is that
if a component on a satellite breaks
down there really are limited
opportunities for repairs and only at
great cost but what if we were smarter
about how we design satellites what if
all satellites regardless of what
country they're built in had to be
standardized in some way for recycling
servicing or active deorbiting what if
there actually were international laws
with teeth that enforced end-of-life
disposal of satellites instead of moving
them out of the way as a temporary
solution or maybe satellite
manufacturers need to be charged a
deposit to even launch a satellite into
orbit and that deposit would only be
returned if the satellite was disposed
of properly or if they cleaned up some
quota of debris or maybe a satellite
needs to have technology on board to
help accelerate deorbit there are some
encouraging signs the UK's tech demo
sat.1 launched in 2014 for example was
designed for end-of-life disposal via a
small drag sail this works for this
satellite because it's small but
satellites that are higher or in larger
orbits or are larger altogether like the
size of school buses will require other
disposal options so maybe you get into
things like high-powered lasers or
tugging using nets or tethers as crazy
as low sound in the short term and then
one really cool possibility is the idea
of orbital tow trucks or space mechanics
imagine if a robotic arm on some sort of
space tow truck could fix the broken
components on a satellite making them
usable again or what if that very same
robotic arm could refuel the propellant
tank on a spacecraft that relies on
chemical propulsion just like you or I
would refuel the fuel tanks on our cars
robotic repair and maintenance could
extend the lives of hundreds of
satellites orbiting around the earth
whatever the disposal or cleanup options
we come up with it's clearly not just a
technical problem
there's also complex space laws and
politics that we have to sort out
simply put we haven't found a way to use
space sustainably yet exploring
innovating to change the way we live and
work are what we as humans do and in
space exploration we're literally moving
beyond the boundaries of Earth but as we
push thresholds in the name of learning
and innovation we must remember that
accountability for our environments
never goes away there is without doubt
congestion in the low earth and
geostationary orbits and we cannot keep
launching new satellites to replace the
ones that have broken down without doing
something about them first just like we
would never leave a broken-down car in
the middle of the highway next time you
use your phone check the weather or use
your GPS think about the satellite
technologies that makes those activities
possible but also think about the very
impact that the satellites have on the
environment surrounding Earth and help
spread the message that together we must
reduce our impact Earth's orbit is
breathtakingly beautiful and our gateway
to exploration it's up to us to keep it
that way
thank you